Chapter 1 
Israel’s ancient apostasy typifies an end-time apostasy, with salvation reserved for some who repent.


Chapter 2 
The end-time restoration of Zion/Jerusalem contrasts Jehovah’s judgment of the world at his coming.


Chapter 3 
Wickedness in society leads to anarchy, internal collapse, destitution, and invasion by enemies.


Chapter 4 
In his Day of Judgment Jehovah preserves alive those whose names are inscribed in the Book of Life.


Chapter 5 
Jehovah’s vineyard yields bad fruit, leading to Assyria’s invasion and covenant curses on offenders.


Chapter 6 
Jehovah appears to Isaiah in the temple and sends him as a prophet to warn of imminent judgments.


Chapter 7 
King Ahaz’ transgression of the terms of his covenant leads to a hostile world power gaining supremacy.


Chapter 8 
A new Flood in the form of Assyria’s world conquest awaits all but those who find refuge in Jehovah.


Chapter 9 
A fiery holocaust engulfs the land as leaders and people apostatize and Jehovah empowers his servant.


Chapter 10 
Jehovah appoints the king of Assyria to despoil and destroy the wicked of his people and the nations.


Chapter 11 
As an ensign to the nations Jehovah’s servant gathers a remnant of Israel and Judah in a new exodus.


Chapter 12 
Songs of Salvation and exultation follow Jehovah’s deliverance of a remnant of his people in Zion.


Chapter 13 
The Assyrian alliance destroys the wicked world that is Babylon as God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah.


Chapter 14 
The king of Assyria/Babylon conquers the world and ascends the heavens but his soul descends to Hell.


Chapter 15 
Moab, a kindred people, suffers calamity in Jehovah’s Day of Judgment, their prayers to no avail.


Chapter 16 
Moab’s prideful people receive three years’ warning before Jehovah destroys them and their land.


Chapter 17 
Disaster overtakes the people of Ephraim and their allies for forgetting Jehovah and loving idols.


Chapter 18 
People’s dread of Assyria’s world conquest is unfounded as Jehovah has prepared a way of escape.


Chapter 19 
Although the world’s superpower Egypt suffers internal collapse, Jehovah delivers his covenanters.


Chapter 20 
Assyria subjugates the superpower Egypt after Jehovah’s prophet–servant gives three years’ warning.


Chapter 21 
Jehovah appoints a watchman to warn of Babylon’s imminent fall at the hands of the Assyrian alliance.


Chapter 22 
Sports and amusement addicts suffer enemy invasion; Jehovah appoints his servant in place of another.


Chapter 23 
Tyre, the world shipping empire with its magnates, comes to a sudden end in Jehovah’s Day of Judgment.


Chapter 24 
Wickedness by the earth’s inhabitants leads to a cataclysmic destruction and collapse into chaos.


Chapter 25 
Survivors of the earth’s catastrophic destruction sing praises when Jehovah does away with death.


Chapter 26 
Unlike their oppressive rulers, the righteous survive the earth’s desolation while others resurrect.


Chapter 27 
At his harvest of the earth’s wicked, Jehovah gleans out individually his people who bear good fruit.


Chapter 28 
Ephraim and its prophets reap disaster for being delusional and for rejecting divine revelation.


Chapter 29 
Unsealing the sealed Book of Isaiah overturns the learning of academics and exposes spiritual error.


Chapter 30 
At Jehovah’s coming the rebellious suffer destruction but those who prove loyal enjoy deliverance.


Chapter 31 
Those who trust in Egypt’s military might rely on an arm of flesh as Jehovah alone is all-powerful.


Chapter 32 
Jehovah guides and protects the just but he turns the tables on perverse preachers and complacent women.


Chapter 33 
Jehovah preserves the righteous at his coming but the wicked of his people and the nations burn up.


Chapter 34 
The nations are slaughtered and their lands laid waste in Jehovah’s day of vengeance on behalf of Zion.


Chapter 35 
At the new exodus to Zion the righteous regenerate and the desert blooms, heralding Jehovah’s coming.


Chapter 36 
The king of Assyria invades many lands and lays siege to a remnant of Jehovah’s people in Jerusalem.


Chapter 37 
As King Hezekiah intercedes on behalf of his people Jehovah delivers them from the besieging Assyrians.


Chapter 38 
When interceding with Jehovah on behalf of his people against Assyria, Hezekiah suffers nearly to death.


Chapter 39 
Upon his recovery from illness and Jehovah’s victory over Assyria, Hezekiah gains notoriety.


Chapter 40 
Having spiritually ascended, Zion/Jerusalem declares good tidings to those who have yet to ascend.


Chapter 41 
Jehovah’s righteous servant, who hails from the east, leads Jacob/Israel’s returnees in a new conquest.


Chapter 42 
Jehovah’s appointing his servant as a light to the nations leads to a new exodus or to captivity.


Chapter 43 
Jehovah’s people who repent of idolatry return in a new exodus from the four directions of the earth.


Chapter 44 
Jehovah’s servant resembles Moses and Cyrus in dissuading people from idols and rebuilding the temple.


Chapter 45 
Jehovah’s servant resembles David and Cyrus in restoring Jehovah’s people and routing their enemies.


Chapter 46 
Jehovah sends his servant as a bird of prey to turn his errant people from idolatry to righteousness.


Chapter 47 
The Harlot Babylon, who rules as Mistress of Kingdoms, descends into the dust in Jehovah’s Day of Judgment.


Chapter 48 
Jehovah’s servant calls on Jacob/Israel to forsake its idols and return in a new exodus out of Babylon.


Chapter 49 
Jehovah empowers his servant after he is rejected to restore his people and to implement their new exodus.


Chapter 50 
Jehovah’s servant meets hostility from those who sell themselves, who light their way with mere sparks.


Chapter 51 
Jehovah empowers his servant as an arm of righteousness to deliver his people in an exodus to Zion.


Chapter 52 
Jehovah’s servant and Zion’s watchmen accomplish Zion’s restoration beginning with a new exodus.


Chapter 53 
Jehovah’s descent phase as a sacrificial lamb (before his ascent as King of Zion) atones for transgressors.


Chapter 54 
Jehovah’s millennial covenant is a composite of all covenants he made with his people and with individuals.


Chapter 55 
As a witness and lawgiver to the nations, Jehovah’s servant mediates the new covenant with his people.


Chapter 56 
Jehovah curses the blind watchmen of his people but exalts his servants who hold fast to his covenant.


Chapter 57 
Jehovah gathers the righteous from among the wicked whose practices turn cultic and perverse.


Chapter 58 
Relieving the oppressed and observing the Sabbath sanctify fast days and beget covenant blessings.


Chapter 59 
Jehovah’s coming spells retribution for deceivers and predators but deliverance for those who repent.


Chapter 60 
At the return to Zion of kings and peoples, Jehovah transforms the land and the millennial age begins.


Chapter 61 
For having endured shame those whom Jehovah’s servant endows receive a twofold millennial inheritance.


Chapter 62 
Zion/Jerusalem’s watchmen cry to Jehovah day and night as they prepare the way for Jehovah’s coming.


Chapter 63 
At his coming, Jehovah takes vengeance on those whom he had redeemed but who yet rebelled against him.