*Isaiah

hd1 
Israel’s ancient apostasy typifies an end-time apostasy, with salvation reserved for some who repent.

ch1
1 The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz which he beheld concerning Judea and Jerusalem during the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah:
2 Hear, O heavens! Give heed, O earth!
Jehovah has spoken:
I have reared sons, brought them up,
but they have revolted against me.
3 The ox knows its owner,
the ass its master’s stall,
but Israel does not know;
my people are insensible.
4 Alas, a nation astray,
a people weighed down by sin,
the offspring of wrongdoers,
perverse children:
they have forsaken Jehovah,
they have spurned the Holy One of Israel,
they have lapsed into apostasy.
5 Why be smitten further
by adding to your waywardness?
The whole head is sick,
the whole heart diseased.
6 From the soles of the feet even to the head
there is nothing sound,
only wounds and bruises and festering sores;
they have not been pressed out or bound up,
nor soothed with ointment.
7 Your land is ruined,
your cities burned with fire;
your native soil is devoured by aliens in your presence,
laid waste at its takeover by foreigners.
8 The Daughter of Zion is left
like a shelter in a vineyard,
a hut in a melon field,
a city under siege.
9 Had not Jehovah of Hosts left us a few survivors,
we should have been as Sodom,
or become like Gomorrah.
10 Hear the word of Jehovah,
O leaders of Sodom;
give heed to the law of our God,
you people of Gomorrah!
11 For what purpose are your abundant
sacrifices to me? says Jehovah.
I have had my fill of offerings of rams
and fat of fatted beasts;
the blood of bulls and sheep and he-goats
I do not want.
12 When you come to see me,
who requires you to trample my courts so?
13 Bring no more worthless offerings;
they are as a loathsome incense to me.
As for convening meetings at the New Month
and on the Sabbath,
wickedness with the solemn gathering
I cannot approve.
14 Your monthly and regular meetings
my soul detests.
They have become a burden on me;
I am weary of putting up with them.
15 When you spread forth your hands,
I will conceal my eyes from you;
though you pray at length, I will not hear—
your hands are filled with blood.
16 Wash yourselves clean:
remove your wicked deeds
from before my eyes;
cease to do evil.
17 Learn to do good: demand justice,
stand up for the oppressed;
plead the cause of the fatherless,
appeal on behalf of the widow.
18 Come now, let us put it to the test,
says Jehovah:
though your sins are as scarlet,
they can be made white as snow;
though they have reddened as crimson,
they may become white as wool.
19 If you are willing and obey,
you shall eat the good of the land.
20 But if you are unwilling and disobey,
you shall be eaten by the sword.
By his mouth Jehovah has spoken it.
21 How the faithful city
has become a harlot!
She was filled with justice;
righteousness made its abode in her,
but now murderers.
22 Your silver has become dross,
your wine diluted with water.
23 Your rulers are renegades,
accomplices of robbers:
with one accord they love bribes
and run after rewards;
they do not dispense justice to the fatherless,
nor does the widow’s case come before them.
24 Therefore the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts,
the Valiant One of Israel, declares,
Woe to them! I will relieve me
of my adversaries,
avenge me of my enemies.
25 I will restore my hand over you
and smelt away your dross as in a crucible,
and remove all your alloy.
26 I will restore your judges as at the first,
and your counsellors as in the beginning.
After this you shall be called
the City of Righteousness, a faithful city.
27 For Zion shall be ransomed by justice,
those of her who repent by righteousness.
28 But criminals and sinners
shall be altogether shattered
when those who forsake Jehovah are annihilated.
29 And you will be ashamed of the oaks you cherished
and blush for the parks you were fond of;
30 you shall become like an oak whose leaves wither,
and as a garden that has no water.
31 The mighty shall be as refuse,
and their works a spark;
both shall burn up alike,
and there shall be none to extinguish.

hd2 
The end-time restoration of Zion/Jerusalem contrasts Jehovah’s judgment of the world at his coming.

ch2
1 A prophecy concerning Judea and Jerusalem which Isaiah the son of Amoz saw in vision:
2 In the latter days
the mountain of Jehovah’s house
shall become established
as the head of the mountains;
it shall be preeminent among the hills,
and all nations will flow to it.
3 Many peoples shall go, saying,
Come, let us go up
to the mountain of Jehovah,
to the house of the God of Jacob,
that he may instruct us in his ways,
that we may follow in his paths.
For out of Zion shall go forth the law,
and from Jerusalem the word of Jehovah.
4 He will judge between the nations
and arbitrate for many peoples.
They will beat their swords into plowshares,
their spears into pruning hooks:
nation will not lift the sword against nation,
nor will they learn warfare any more.
5 O house of Jacob, come,
let us follow the light of Jehovah.
6 For you, O Jehovah, have forsaken your people,
the house of Jacob, because,
like the Philistines,
they provide themselves with
mystics from the East
and are content with the infantile heathen.
7 Their land is full of silver and gold
and there is no end to their wealth;
their land is full of horses
and there is no end to their chariots.
8 Their land is full of idols:
they adore the works of their hands,
things their own fingers have made.
9 Mankind is brought low
when men thus debase themselves.
Forbear them not!
10 Go into the rocks; hide in the dust
from the awesome presence of Jehovah
and from the brightness of his glory.
11 The haughty eyes of men shall be lowered
and man’s pride abased;
Jehovah alone shall be exalted in that day.
12 Jehovah of Hosts has a day in store
for all the proud and arrogant
and for all who are exalted,
that they may be brought low.
13 It shall come against all the lofty
cedars of Lebanon that lift themselves up high,
and against all the oaks of Bashan,
14 against all high mountains and elevated hills,
15 against every tall tower and reinforced wall,
16 against [all vessels at sea,]
both merchant ships and pleasure craft.
17 The haughtiness of men shall be abased,
and man’s pride brought low;
Jehovah alone shall be exalted in that day.
18 He will utterly supplant the false gods.
19 Men will go into caves in the rocks
and holes in the ground,
from the awesome presence of Jehovah
and from the brightness of his glory,
when he arises and strikes terror on earth.
20 In that day men will throw away
to the moles and to the bats
their idols of silver and gods of gold
which they have made for themselves
to adore.
21 Men will go into crevices in the rocks
and fissures in the cliffs,
from the awesome presence of Jehovah
and from the brightness of his glory,
when he arises and strikes terror on earth.
22 Desist from the things of man,
in whose nostrils is but breath!
For of what consideration is he?

hd3 
Wickedness in society leads to anarchy, internal collapse, destitution, and invasion by enemies.

ch3
1 Even now, the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts,
deprives Judea and Jerusalem
of both staff and crutch—
all food supply and water supply,
2 the valiant man and soldier,
the magistrate and prophet, the augur and elder,
3 the officer and dignitary,
advisers, skilled craftsmen, and orators.
4 I, Jehovah, will make adolescents their rulers;
delinquents will lord it over them.
5 People will oppress one another,
every man his neighbor.
The young will be insolent to the elderly,
the vile to the honorable.
6 Then will a man apprehend a kinsman
of his father’s house, and say,
You have a tunic: be our leader
and take charge of this ruination!
7 But he will raise his hand in that day
and swear, I am no physician.
There is neither food nor clothing in my house;
you cannot make me a leader of the people.
8 Jerusalem will falter and Judea fall
because their tongue and their actions
are contrary to Jehovah,
an affront to his glory before his very eyes.
9 The look on their faces betrays them:
they flaunt their sin like Sodom;
they cannot hide it.
Woe to their souls;
they have brought disaster upon themselves!
10 Tell the righteous it shall be well with them;
they shall eat the fruits of their own labors.
11 But woe to the wicked
when calamity overtakes them:
they shall be paid back
for the deeds they have done!
12 As for my people, babes subject them;
women wield authority over them.
O my people, your leaders mislead you,
abolishing your traditional ways.
13 Jehovah will take a stand and contend with them;
he has arisen to judge the nations.
14 He will bring to trial the elders of his people
and their rulers, and say to them,
It is you who have devoured the vineyard;
you fill your houses by depriving the needy.
15 What do you mean by oppressing my people,
humbling the faces of the poor?
says Jehovah of Hosts.
16 Jehovah says, moreover,
Because the women of Zion are haughty
and put on airs, painting their eyes,
ever flirting when they walk
and clacking with their feet,
17 my Lord will afflict the scalps
of the women of Zion with baldness;
Jehovah will expose their private parts.
18 In that day my Lord will strip away their finery—the anklets, head ornaments and crescents,
19 the pendants, chains and scarves,
20 tiaras, bracelets and ribbons, zodiac signs and charm amulets,
21 the rings, the noselets,
22 the elegant dress, the shawl, the kerchief and the purse,
23 hosiery, sheer linen, millinery, and cloaks.
24 And instead of perfume there shall be a stench,
instead of the girdle, a piece of twine,
instead of the coiffure, baldness,
instead of the festive dress, a loincloth of burlap;
for in place of beauty
there shall be ignominy.
25 Your men shall be felled by the sword,
your might overthrown in war.
26 Her gateways shall lie bereaved and forlorn;
she shall sit on the ground destitute.

hd4 
In his Day of Judgment Jehovah preserves alive those whose names are inscribed in the Book of Life.

ch4
1 Seven women will take hold of one man
in that day, and say,
We will eat our own food,
wear our own clothes,
only let us be called by your name—
take away our reproach!
2 In that day the plant of Jehovah shall be beautiful and glorious, and the earth’s fruit the pride and glory of the survivors of Israel.
3 Then shall they who are left in Zion and they who remain in Jerusalem be called holy—all who were inscribed to be among the living at Jerusalem.
4 This shall be when my Lord has washed away the excrement of the women of Zion and cleansed Jerusalem of its bloodshed, in the spirit of justice, by a burning wind.
5 Over the whole site of Mount Zion, and over its solemn assembly, Jehovah will form a cloud by day and a mist glowing with fire by night: above all that is glorious shall be a canopy.
6 It shall be a shelter and shade from the heat of the day, a secret refuge from the downpour and from rain.

hd5 
Jehovah’s vineyard yields bad fruit, leading to Assyria’s invasion and covenant curses on offenders.

ch5
1 Let me sing for my Beloved
a love song about his vineyard:
My Beloved had a vineyard
on the fertile brow of a hill.
2 He cultivated it, clearing it of stones,
and planted it with choice vines.
He built a watchtower in its midst
and hewed for it a winepress as well.
Then he expected it to yield grapes,
but it produced wild grapes.
3 Now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem and you men of Judea,
please judge between me and my vineyard!
4 What more could have been done
for my vineyard than I have done for it?
When I expected it to yield grapes,
why did it produce wild grapes?
5 Let me now inform you
what I will do to my vineyard:
I will have its hedge removed
and let it be burned;
I will have its wall broken through
and let it be trampled.
6 I will make it a desolation:
it shall neither be pruned nor hoed,
but briars and thorns shall overgrow it.
Moreover, I will forbid the rainclouds to rain on it.
7 The vineyard of Jehovah of Hosts is the house of Israel
and the people of Judah his cherished grove.
He expected justice,
but there was injustice;
he expected righteousness,
but there was an outcry.
8 Woe to those who join house to house
and link field to field till no place is left,
and you are restricted to dwell
in the centers of the land!
9 Jehovah of Hosts spoke this in my hearing:
Surely many buildings shall lie desolate,
large and fine houses unoccupied.
10 A ten-acre vineyard shall yield but one bath,
a homer of seed but an ephah.
11 Woe to those who go after liquor
as soon as they arise in the morning,
who linger at night parties, inflamed by wine!
12 There are harps and lyres,
drums, flutes, and wine at their banquets,
but they regard not what Jehovah does,
nor perceive his hands at work.
13 Therefore are my people exiled
without knowing why;
their best men die of famine,
their masses perish with thirst.
14 Sheol becomes ravenous,
opening its mouth insatiably;
into it descend their elite with the masses,
their boisterous ones and revelers.
15 Mankind is brought low
when men debase themselves,
causing the eyes of the high-minded to be downcast.
16 But Jehovah of Hosts will be exalted
by a just judgment,
the holy God show himself holy
by his righteousness.
17 Then shall his sheep feed in their pasture,
and proselytes eat in the ruins of the affluent.
18 Woe to those drawn to sin by vain attachments,
hitched to transgression like a trailer,
19 who think, Let him quickly speed up his work
so we may see it!
Let the plan of the Holy One of Israel
soon come to pass, and we will know!
20 Woe to those who suppose what is evil to be good
and what is good, evil!
They put darkness for light
and light for darkness;
they make bitterness sweet and the sweet bitter.
21 Woe to those who are wise in their own eyes
and clever in their own view!
22 Woe to those who are valiant at drinking wine
and champions at mixing liquor!
23 Woe to those who acquit the guilty for a bribe
but deny justice to the innocent!
24 As a blazing fire consumes stubble,
and as dry weeds wane before the flame,
so shall their roots decay away
and their blossoms fly up like dust.
For they have despised the law of Jehovah of Hosts
and reviled the words of the Holy One of Israel.
25 Therefore the anger of Jehovah is kindled
against his people:
he draws back his hand against them
and strikes them;
the mountains quake, and their corpses
lie like litter about the streets.
Yet for all this his anger is not abated;
his hand is upraised still.
26 He raises an ensign to distant nations
and summons them from beyond the horizon.
Forthwith they come, swiftly and speedily.
27 Not one of them grows weary,
nor does any stumble;
they do not drowse or fall asleep.
Their waist-belts come not loose
nor their sandal thongs undone.
28 Their arrows are sharp;
all their bows are strung.
The tread of their warhorses resembles flint;
their chariot wheels revolve like a whirlwind.
29 They have the roar of a lion;
they are aroused like young lions:
growling, they seize the prey, and escape,
and none comes to the rescue.
30 He shall be stirred up against them in that day,
even as the Sea is stirred up.
And should one look to the land,
there too shall be a distressing gloom,
for the daylight shall be darkened
by an overhanging mist.

hd6 
Jehovah appears to Isaiah in the temple and sends him as a prophet to warn of imminent judgments.

ch6
1 In the year of King Uzziah’s death, I saw my Lord seated on a throne, highly exalted, the skirt of his robe filling the sanctuary.
2  Seraphs stood by him overhead, each having six wings— with two they could veil their presence, with two conceal their location, and with two fly about.
3 They called out to one another, and said,
Most holy is Jehovah of Hosts;
the consummation of all the earth is his glory!
4 The threshold shook to its foundation at the sound of those who called and a mist filled the temple.
5 Then I thought, Woe is me: I have been struck dumb, for I am a man of unclean speech, and I live among a people of unclean speech: I have seen the King, Jehovah of Hosts, with my own eyes!
6 Then one of the seraphs flew to me carrying an ember which he had taken with tongs from the altar.
7 Touching it to my mouth, he said, See, this has touched your lips: your sins are taken away, your transgressions atoned for.
8 Then I heard the voice of my Lord saying, Whom shall I send? Who will go for us? And I replied, Here am I; send me!
9 And he said, Go, and say to these people,
Go on hearing, but not understanding;
Go on seeing, but not perceiving.
10 Make the heart of these people grow fat;
dull their ears and shut their eyes,
lest they see with their eyes
and hear with their ears,
understand in their heart,
and repent, and be healed.
11 And I replied, For how long, my Lord? And he said,
Until the cities lie desolate
and without inhabitant,
the houses without a man,
and the land ravaged to ruin.
12 For Jehovah will drive men away,
and great shall be the exodus
from the centers of the land.
13 And while yet a tenth of the people
remain in it, or return,
they shall be burned.
But like the terebinth or the oak
when it is felled, whose stump remains alive,
so shall the holy offspring be what is left standing.

hd7 
King Ahaz’ transgression of the terms of his covenant leads to a hostile world power gaining supremacy.

ch7
1 When Ahaz son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, was king of Judah, Rezin king of Aram and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel came up to Jerusalem to wage war against it, but could not overpower it.
2 And when the house of David was informed that Aram was leading Ephraim on, the king’s mind and the minds of his people were shaken, as trees in a forest are shaken by a gale.
3 Then Jehovah said to Isaiah, Go out and meet Ahaz, you and your son Shear-Jashub, at the end of the aqueduct of the Upper Reservoir, on the road to the Laundry Plaza.
4 Say to him, See to it that you remain calm and unafraid. Be not intimidated by these two smoking tail ends of kindling, by the burning anger of Rezin and Aram and the son of Remaliah,
5 even though Aram has conceived an evil plot against you, as has Ephraim and the son of Remaliah, who say,
6 Let us invade Judah and stir up trouble there. We will take it for ourselves by force and set a ruler over it—the son of Tabeal.
7 Thus says my Lord Jehovah:
It shall not occur or transpire.
8 For as surely as Damascus is the capital of Aram
and Rezin the head of Damascus,
within sixty-five years shall Ephraim
be shattered as a nation.
9 But as surely as Samaria is the capital of Ephraim
and the son of Remaliah the head of Samaria,
you will not believe it,
because you are not loyal.
10 Again Jehovah addressed Ahaz, and said,
11 Ask a sign for yourself from Jehovah your God, whether in the depths below or in the heights above.
12 But Ahaz said, I will not. I will not put Jehovah to the test.
13 Then Isaiah said, Take heed, O house of David! Is it not enough for you to try the patience of men? Must you also try the patience of my God?
14 Therefore will my Lord of himself give you a sign: the young woman with child shall give birth to a son and name him Immanuel.
15 Cream and honey will he eat by the time he has learned to reject what is evil and choose what is good.
16 But before the child learns to reject the evil and choose the good, the land whose two rulers you loathe shall lie forsaken.
17 Jehovah will bring upon you and your people and your father’s house a day unlike any since Ephraim broke away from Judah—the day of the king of Assyria.
18 In that day Jehovah will signal for the flies from the far rivers of Egypt and for the bees in the land of Assyria.
19 And they will come and settle with one accord in the river beds of the prairie and in rocky ravines, and by all ditches and water holes.
20 In that day my Lord will use a razor hired at the River—the king of Assyria—to shave your head and the hair of your legs, and to cut off even your beard.
21 In that day a man will keep alive a young cow and a pair of sheep.
22 And because of their plentiful milk, men will eat the cream. All who remain in the land will feed on cream and honey.
23 In that day every plot of ground with a thousand vines worth a thousand pieces of currency shall be briars and thorns.
24 Men will go there with bows and arrows, for the whole land shall revert to wilderness.
25 And on all hillsides cultivated by the hoe you will no longer go for fear of the briars and thorns, but they shall serve as a cattle range, a terrain for sheep to tread down.

hd8 
A new Flood in the form of Assyria’s world conquest awaits all but those who find refuge in Jehovah.

ch


hd9 
A fiery holocaust engulfs the land as leaders and people apostatize and Jehovah empowers his servant.

ch


hd10 
Jehovah appoints the king of Assyria to despoil and destroy the wicked of his people and the nations.

ch


hd11 
As an ensign to the nations Jehovah’s servant gathers a remnant of Israel and Judah in a new exodus.

ch


hd12 
Songs of Salvation and exultation follow Jehovah’s deliverance of a remnant of his people in Zion.

ch


hd13 
The Assyrian alliance destroys the wicked world that is Babylon as God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah.

ch


hd14 
The king of Assyria/Babylon conquers the world and ascends the heavens but his soul descends to Hell.

ch


hd15 
Moab, a kindred people, suffers calamity in Jehovah’s Day of Judgment, their prayers to no avail.

ch


hd16 
Moab’s prideful people receive three years’ warning before Jehovah destroys them and their land.

ch


hd17 
Disaster overtakes the people of Ephraim and their allies for forgetting Jehovah and loving idols.

ch


hd18 
People’s dread of Assyria’s world conquest is unfounded as Jehovah has prepared a way of escape.

ch


hd19 
Although the world’s superpower Egypt suffers internal collapse, Jehovah delivers his covenanters.

ch


hd20 
Assyria subjugates the superpower Egypt after Jehovah’s prophet–servant gives three years’ warning.

ch


hd21 
Jehovah appoints a watchman to warn of Babylon’s imminent fall at the hands of the Assyrian alliance.

ch


hd22 
Sports and amusement addicts suffer enemy invasion; Jehovah appoints his servant in place of another.

ch


hd23 
Tyre, the world shipping empire with its magnates, comes to a sudden end in Jehovah’s Day of Judgment.

ch


hd24 
Wickedness by the earth’s inhabitants leads to a cataclysmic destruction and collapse into chaos.

ch


hd25 
Survivors of the earth’s catastrophic destruction sing praises when Jehovah does away with death.

ch


hd26 
Unlike their oppressive rulers, the righteous survive the earth’s desolation while others resurrect.

ch


hd27 
At his harvest of the earth’s wicked, Jehovah gleans out individually his people who bear good fruit.

ch


hd28 
Ephraim and its prophets reap disaster for being delusional and for rejecting divine revelation.

ch


hd29 
Unsealing the sealed Book of Isaiah overturns the learning of academics and exposes spiritual error.

ch


hd30 
At Jehovah’s coming the rebellious suffer destruction but those who prove loyal enjoy deliverance.

ch


hd31 
Those who trust in Egypt’s military might rely on an arm of flesh as Jehovah alone is all-powerful.

ch


hd32 
Jehovah guides and protects the just but he turns the tables on perverse preachers and complacent women.

ch


hd33 
Jehovah preserves the righteous at his coming but the wicked of his people and the nations burn up.

ch


hd34 
The nations are slaughtered and their lands laid waste in Jehovah’s day of vengeance on behalf of Zion.

ch


hd35 
At the new exodus to Zion the righteous regenerate and the desert blooms, heralding Jehovah’s coming.

ch


hd36 
The king of Assyria invades many lands and lays siege to a remnant of Jehovah’s people in Jerusalem.

ch


hd37 
As King Hezekiah intercedes on behalf of his people Jehovah delivers them from the besieging Assyrians.

ch


hd38 
When interceding with Jehovah on behalf of his people against Assyria, Hezekiah suffers nearly to death.

ch


hd39 
Upon his recovery from illness and Jehovah’s victory over Assyria, Hezekiah gains notoriety.

ch


hd40 
Having spiritually ascended, Zion/Jerusalem declares good tidings to those who have yet to ascend.

ch


hd41 
Jehovah’s righteous servant, who hails from the east, leads Jacob/Israel’s returnees in a new conquest.

ch


hd42 
Jehovah’s appointing his servant as a light to the nations leads to a new exodus or to captivity.

ch


hd43 
Jehovah’s people who repent of idolatry return in a new exodus from the four directions of the earth.

ch


hd44 
Jehovah’s servant resembles Moses and Cyrus in dissuading people from idols and rebuilding the temple.

ch


hd45 
Jehovah’s servant resembles David and Cyrus in restoring Jehovah’s people and routing their enemies.

ch


hd46 
Jehovah sends his servant as a bird of prey to turn his errant people from idolatry to righteousness.

ch


hd47 
The Harlot Babylon, who rules as Mistress of Kingdoms, descends into the dust in Jehovah’s Day of Judgment.

ch


hd48 
Jehovah’s servant calls on Jacob/Israel to forsake its idols and return in a new exodus out of Babylon.

ch


hd49 
Jehovah empowers his servant after he is rejected to restore his people and to implement their new exodus.

ch


hd50 
Jehovah’s servant meets hostility from those who sell themselves, who light their way with mere sparks.

ch


hd51 
Jehovah empowers his servant as an arm of righteousness to deliver his people in an exodus to Zion.

ch


hd52 
Jehovah’s servant and Zion’s watchmen accomplish Zion’s restoration beginning with a new exodus.

ch


hd53 
Jehovah’s descent phase as a sacrificial lamb (before his ascent as King of Zion) atones for transgressors.

ch


hd54 
Jehovah’s millennial covenant is a composite of all covenants he made with his people and with individuals.

ch


hd55 
As a witness and lawgiver to the nations, Jehovah’s servant mediates the new covenant with his people.

ch


hd56 
Jehovah curses the blind watchmen of his people but exalts his servants who hold fast to his covenant.

ch


hd57 
Jehovah gathers the righteous from among the wicked whose practices turn cultic and perverse.

ch


hd58 
Relieving the oppressed and observing the Sabbath sanctify fast days and beget covenant blessings.

ch


hd59 
Jehovah’s coming spells retribution for deceivers and predators but deliverance for those who repent.

ch


hd60 
At the return to Zion of kings and peoples, Jehovah transforms the land and the millennial age begins.

ch


hd61 
For having endured shame those whom Jehovah’s servant endows receive a twofold millennial inheritance.

ch


hd62 
Zion/Jerusalem’s watchmen cry to Jehovah day and night as they prepare the way for Jehovah’s coming.

ch


hd63 
At his coming, Jehovah takes vengeance on those whom he had redeemed but who yet rebelled against him.

ch


